Telemetry module (+ sonification) documentation (#37)
OpenSpace/OpenSpace-Docs: creating-data-assets/modules/telemetry/angle-information.md

---
authors:
  - name: OpenSpace Team
---

# Angle Calculations
The telemetry types in the [Telemetry Module](index.md) sometimes provide information about angles from the camera to one or more tracked objects in the scene. The angles provide information about the objects' location in relation to the camera. This page covers the details of how those angles are computed.

> As briefly mentioned in the [Angle Calculation Mode](./telemetry-types-general.md#angle-calculation-mode) telemetry type on the general telemetry types page, there are two different angle calculation modes: [Horizontal](#horizontal) and [Circular](#circular). The mode can be set in the OpenSpace user interface, and which mode to use depends on the type of display and/or sound environment used, as well as the use case. For example, in the [sonification](./sonification.md#sonification), the angles map sounds to positions in a surround sound system. Depending on the setup of the speakers in a surround sound system, the angle may need to be computed differently. This is why there are two modes. The Horizontal mode is tailored for display environments with a forward-facing direction, such as the Visualization Center dome theater in Norrköping, Sweden, while the Circular mode is designed for omnidirectional planetariums, such as the Hayden Planetarium at the American Museum of Natural History in New York, USA. For an overview of these surround sound configurations, see [Surround Sound Configurations](./sonification.md#surround-sound-configurations). Each angle calculation mode and its respective use case are explained in more detail below.

Author: The surround configuration images are essentially a blueprint for how thye look like and there is a link to that section here now already. I want it to be clear that it has been specificaly designed for these environments but it could potentially be extended to similar envirionments too.

> As briefly mentioned in the [Angle Calculation Mode](./telemetry-types-general.md#angle-calculation-mode) telemetry type on the general telemetry types page, there are two different angle calculation modes: [Horizontal](#horizontal) and [Circular](#circular). The mode can be set in the OpenSpace user interface, and which mode to use depends on the type of display and/or sound environment used, as well as the use case. For example, in the [sonification](./sonification.md#sonification), the angles map sounds to positions in a surround sound system. Depending on the setup of the speakers in a surround sound system, the angle may need to be computed differently. This is why there are two modes. The Horizontal mode is tailored for display environments with a forward-facing direction, such as the Visualization Center dome theater in Norrköping, Sweden, while the Circular mode is designed for omnidirectional planetariums, such as the Hayden Planetarium at the American Museum of Natural History in New York, USA. For an overview of these surround sound configurations, see [Surround Sound Configurations](./sonification.md#surround-sound-configurations). Each angle calculation mode and its respective use case are explained in more detail below.

Reviewer: 👍 Not a big deal. But maybe we just add a picture showing the difference?  Either from inside the domes, or an illustration similar to this one? I think of the inside of the domes would be the most useful, as it would give the reader a clearer sense of what we mean

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6290b284-8ec5-4697-ab62-35bdb14d19a6)

But also feel free to ignore this comment

Both angle calculation modes will always compute an angle from the camera to the object within a horizontal plane of reference in relation to the camera. However, both modes may also include an optional _elevation angle_ that provides information about the objects' vertical height in relation to the horizontal reference plane.

:::{important}
In a multiple-node display system, where several computers work together to create an immersive display (such as a dome theater or a planetarium), the angles are only calculated on the main display (often the display used by the pilot). Therefore, to ensure that the angles match the surround sound system, it is important that the main display is configured to align with the surround system. For example, if the immersive display has a forward direction at the center of the entire display, then the main display should also have its center as the forward direction. This ensures that the angles calculated for the main display correspond to the object's position in the larger immersive environment, aligning with the surround sound configuration.
:::

:::{note}
Note that in the figures below, none of the vectors that are shown are normalized.

> :::

Author: I think it is better to have it to be clear.

## Circular
This angle calculation mode is suitable for centered fisheye displays or omnidirectional immersive environments, such as the Hayden Planetarium at the American Museum of Natural History in New York, USA. For more information about surround sound configurations, see [Surround Sound Configurations](./sonification.md#surround-sound-configurations). This angle determines where the object is placed in a circular space around the center of the screen. The difference in this mode compared to the horizontal one is that this mode calculates the angles in a circular (or radial) manner around the center of the screen. How this angle is computed is explained below.

The goal is to calculate the angle, {math}`\theta`, to the object in a circular space around the center of the screen within a plane of reference, {math}`R`. The reference plane {math}`R` is the plane spanned by the {math}`Camera_{Up}` vector and the left direction of the camera (i.e. the negative {math}`Camera_{Right}` vector), with the negative {math}`Camera_{View}` vector as the normal. The image below shows a figure of these objects and the computations.

<!-- @TODO Generate a dark mode version of this image -->

> :::{image} images/circular.png

Author: I added some 3D perspective and more clear view directions, what do you think?

> :::{image} images/circular.png

Reviewer: Super clear now, great!

Lastly, the elevation angle, {math}`\phi`, between the {math}`Camera_{View}` vector, and the {math}`R_{R}(P_{A}(Object))` vector is calculated, with the {math}`Camera_{Right}` vector (i.e. the normal of the reference plane {math}`R`) used as the reference axis. The elevation angle goes from {math}`-\dfrac{\pi}{2}` to {math}`\dfrac{\pi}{2}` in radians, and zero radians would be directly in the {math}`Camera_{View}` direction. When the object is located above the {math}`Camera_{View}` vector, then the elevation angle will be a positive value, as shown in the figure above. If instead, the object is located below, the elevation angle will become negative.

### Moon Angle
(moon-angle-circular)=
This angle is only calculated for the specialized [Planets Sonification](./telemetry-types-specialized.md#planets-sonification) telemetry type. It is the angle from the planet, {math}`A`, to one of its moons, {math}`B`, within a circular space around the center of the screen, how this angle is computed is explained below.

> The goal is to calculate the angle, {math}`\theta`, from object {math}`A` (the planet) to object {math}`B` (the moon) within a plane of reference, {math}`R`. The reference plane {math}`R` is the plane spanned by the {math}`Camera_{Up}` vector and {math}`Camera_{Right}` vector, with the {math}`Camera_{View}` vector as the normal. The image below shows a figure of these objects and the computations.

Reviewer: Again, please avoid the phrasing "the goal is". It sounds a bit weird. 

Maybe something like: 

```suggestion
The angle {math}`\theta` is here defined as the angle from object {math}`A` (the planet) to object {math}`B` (the moon) within a plane of reference, {math}`R`, with respect to a direction in relation to the camera. The reference plane {math}`R` is the plane spanned by the {math}`Camera_{Up}` vector and {math}`Camera_{Right}` vector, with the {math}`Camera_{View}` vector as the normal. The image below shows a figure of these objects and the computations.
```

<!-- @TODO Change this to be correct for the Circular mode -->
### Moon Additional Elevation Angle
(moon-additional-elevation-angle-circular)=
This angle is only calculated for the specialized [Planets Sonification](./telemetry-types-specialized.md#planets-sonification) telemetry type. This angle is also optional and only calculated if a setting in the [Telemetry Module](index) is enabled. If this setting is not enabled, then this angle is always set to {math}`0.0`. It is the elevation angle from the planet, {math}`A`, to one of its moons, {math}`B`, which determines how far away from the planet, {math}`A`, the moon, {math}`B`, is located in a circular space around the planet, {math}`A`. How this angle is computed is explained below.

> The goal is to calculate the elevation angle, {math}`\phi`, from object {math}`A` (the planet) to object {math}`B` (the moon) within a plane of reference, {math}`R`. The reference plane {math}`R` is the plane spanned by the {math}`Camera_{View}` vector and the {math}`Camera_{Up}` vector, with the {math}`Camera_{Right}` vector as the normal. The plane {math}`C` is also gonna be needed and is the plane spanned by the {math}`Camera_{Up}` vector and the {math}`Camera_{Right}` vector, with the {math}`Camera_{View}` vector as the normal. The image below shows a figure of these objects and the computations.

Reviewer: Same here
```suggestion
The elevation angle, {math}`\phi`, is here defined as the angle from object {math}`A` (the planet) to object {math}`B` (the moon) within a plane of reference, {math}`R`, spanned by the {math}`Camera_{View}` vector and the {math}`Camera_{Up}` vector, with the {math}`Camera_{Right}` vector as the normal. Specifically, for this computation, the position for the moon (which is orbiting point {math}`A`) used is the one which is parallel to the reference plane {math}`R`, no matter the current position of object {math}`B`. This transformation requires information about what is here called plane {math}`C`, which is the plane spanned by the {math}`Camera_{Up}` vector and the {math}`Camera_{Right}` vector, with the {math}`Camera_{View}` vector as the normal. The image below shows a figure of these objects and the computations.
```
?  was missing some details here

# Angle Calculations Explanation

> The following section explains in more depth how the angle calculations work in the different angle calculation modes, as briefly mentioned in [Angle Calculation Mode](./telemetry-types-general.md#angle-calculation-mode). There are two angle calculation modes, Horizontal and Circular, and each of them can have an additional elevation angle. The angle calculations use the function [`orientedAngle`](https://glm.g-truc.net/0.9.4/api/a00210.html#ga3f15db506641d5f9461259672b7f276c) from the [GLM library](https://glm.g-truc.net/0.9.4/api/index.html).
> 
> These angles are useful to locate an object on the screen. For example, in the [sonification](./sonification.md#sonification), these angles help map sounds to positions in a surround sound system. Different surround sound systems are configured differently and therefore, the angles need to be calculated differently, which is why there are two modes. The Horizontal mode is tailored for display environments with a forward-facing direction, like the Visualization Center dome theater in Norrköping, Sweden, while the Circular mode is designed for omnidirectional planetariums, like the Hayden planetarium at the American Museum of Natural History in New York, USA.

Reviewer: I would flip this information a bit to make it easier to follow and introduce the topic of the page a bit better. Maybe:

```suggestion
The telemetry types in the [Telemetry Module](index.md) sometimes provide angles from the camera to one or more tracked objects in the scene. The angles provide information about the objects' location in relation to the viewer (camera). This page covers the details of how those angles are computed. 

As briefly mentioned in [Angle Calculation Mode](./telemetry-types-general.md#angle-calculation-mode) on the general telemetry types page, there are two different angle calculation modes: [Horizontal](#horizontal) and [Circular](#circular). The mode can be set in the OpenSpace User Interface and which mode to use depends on the type of display and/or sound environment used, as well as the use case. For example, in the [sonification](./sonification.md#sonification), the angles map sounds to positions in a surround sound system. Depending on the setup of the speakers in a surround sound system, the angle may need to be computed differently.  This is why there are two modes. The Horizontal mode is tailored for display environments with a forward-facing direction, like the Visualization Center dome theater in Norrköping, Sweden, while the Circular mode is designed for omnidirectional planetariums, like the Hayden Planetarium at the American Museum of Natural History in New York, USA. Each mode and its respective use case is explained in more detail below. 

Both angle calculation modes will always compute an angle from the camera to the object within a certain plane of reference in relation to the camera. However, both modes may also include an optional _elevation angle_ that provides information about the objects' vertical height in relation to the reference plane. 
```
? It's a bit longer, but could maybe introduce the topic a bit better. What do you think?

I removed the part of the GLM function as of now, since this is not of relevance to the general user/reader of these pages. Maybe move this to a Hint or Note thing at the bottom of the page, for people who are interested?  
```
The angle calculations use the function [`orientedAngle`](https://glm.g-truc.net/0.9.4/api/a00210.html#ga3f15db506641d5f9461259672b7f276c) from the [GLM library](https://glm.g-truc.net/0.9.4/api/index.html).
```
